• Stef: Thank you Markus for agreeing to this interview . It’s up to you now to choose a question among the ones we discussed earlier.
Markus: Ok. Number 10 then!

• Stef: "Be awesome and tell yourself you suck.". This is a quote I got from one of the many interviews you gave and that I watched to prepare for our meeting. Is there a specific moment in your career when you realized that you could push the boundaries of biomech even further and do something that nobody was doing yet?
Markus: Yes. Maybe. It’s hard to say because it was a long time ago.
I think there was a time, after I opened my first home tattoo studio when I was struggling a little bit with the stuff I was doing … it must have been 7 or 8 years ago… and I was not happy and I was not doing anything that I really wanted to do when it comes to biomech. So I stopped doing biomech completely and I started doing all kinds of other things just to get my head in a better place. I started doing japanese work like for a year or two. To learn how to draw properly. You know, like, how to draw water, feathers, wind, the elements and japanese characters, all that. Dragons, scales… and I think that helped me a lot. Afterwards at some point there was somebody who came and he wanted a biomech sleeve from me and I felt ready then! And I had not felt ready for a while but then I thought: "yeah! Let’s just do this" and I drew it and I’m not sure which one that was but that one felt very very different. At the time I was busy on an online forum and I was pretty much the only guy there that would be into biomech tattoos, most of the other guys would be more into traditional work and it was a very rigorous critical forum where I learned how to second guess myself. I wanted to impress those guys. Because that was basically the audience of peers that I would speak to at the moment. I thought that it was important to do something that they could enjoy. From that moment on, I made sure that I did biomech that had a strong foundation with good black lines and a good amount of black shadings, to have a little bit of the same approach as a traditional tattoo artist, but to also get a good amount of the details I wanted to see in there, the kind of "nerdiness" and science fiction ideas that I like to see in my work.
I think that’s how something new and interesting was happening then, yeah. That was probably THE moment.

• Stef : Your website is named lux altera "other light" in latin. Why ?

It's based on the song "Lux Aeterna" the leitmotiv from 2000 movie "Requiem for a dream", one of my favorite movie. It also means that, by tattooing, I like to change people perspective on things.

• Stef : What are your classic book references for biomech, beside Guy Aitchinson books ? 

Necronomicon from H.G Giger

• Stef : Tell us the name of one artist who you like, beside Giger ? 

SpiderZero

• Stef : Who is tattooing your chest ? 

Marc Halbstark
• Stef: I saw your messages on the forum. Everything leaves a trace on the internet and I think it’s interesting because not a lot of tattoo artists participate in forums. They don’t like being criticized and opening themselves to the world and being opened to that kind of critics is really particular actually.
Markus: Yes, well, that was probably the time in my career when I learned the most, especially about myself, my ego and how not to be held back. You know, you get lazy when a lot of people tell you everything you’re doing is right and perfect. You just get lazy. When people tell you there is room for improvement, then you have work to do.
Those were good times!
• Stef: If you don’t mind, let’s go back to japanese tattooing. I see some links between japanese and biomech tattooing styles. Could you elaborate on that?
Markus: Sure.
I actually don’t know a lot about japanese culture and japanese tattoing. Everything I know – or think I know- about it, is the visual side of it. I just like to look at stuff that I like to look at... things that make me feel good deep inside when I look at them you know, things that are aesthetically pleasing like traditional japanese art, their writing, the kanjis... all of this - to me - is a very aesthetic form of artistic expression. I have looked into the work of Hokusai, into japanese tattooing and it is not very surprising. Biomech tattoos and japanese tattoos, those two styles lend themselves very well to very big tattoos, like bodysuits. And that's probably because they both abide by certain common rules of aethetics. When it comes to biomech tattooing, everything is very much distilled into pureness, into pure asthetics, everything has to flow and work with the body and be aesthetically pleasing. Is is not necessarily about knowing what you are looking at. Actually you may not know what you are looking at, so it HAS to be beautiful, or at least to carry an emotion. It can also be aggressive looking or evil but it has to carry these emotions, without putting them into words. And I think japanese artists could always distill a certain aesthetic into anything that they were creating. With the same brushtrokes, the wind, the waves, the scales become alive and when you know how to draw these, you have then understood the foundations of what it means to make things flow and ratios, and angles. You now understand lots of things without needing any scientific upbringing, without knowing how fractals work for example. I got my entry into the aesthetics of art through the Japanese side of it and that's when the penny really dropped for me. I understood the mathematics and physics of nature a little bit but I could not put them into a visual narrative. With japanese art, everything started to make a little bit more sense. It's a very good foundation to build up upon as a tattoo artist.
• Stef: Once we are done with this interview, I will send you a link to the TED talk of Cedric Villani, a famous French mathematician, who received the Fields medal (equivalent of the nobel prize) and who is passionate about sharing the beauty he sees in mathematics.
Markus: It reminds me of something I watched, so I might have already seen it, but, absolutely, yes, send it to me, that's the kind of stuff I like.
• Stef: Regarding the difference between irezumi and biomech, having myself lots of japanese tattoos, I feel that there is the background and then primary topics on top of that. And looking at your work - even though I may not be educated enough! - I see lots of background and some foreground objects. In biomech, is there a foreground and a background or is the background the main subject?
Markus: It is a little bit different. I like to have a certain ratio between the background and the foreground in biomech. When I started biomech it actually was one of the main questions for me. And it is still a big question for tattooers getting started in biomech I think.
How am I going to connect my background with my foreground? Are things floating around freely? Things actually need somehow to make sense. And that's where my sense of physics comes handy a little bit. I do not want things to be floating around, I want them to be anchored and things need to make sense in a physical kind of way. The different elements must look as if they could somehow, exist, function, and work together. And this is not necessarily true in japanese work, because things can be so stylized, and the rules are way stricter when it comes to the relations between the background and the foreground. To me everything kind of flows into each other and I only use my background to make my foreground stand out better. The background is a strategic tool and becomes a stage for the foreground to shine on. It is all about contrast.
• Stef: In one of your interviews, you said that you wanted to translate into tattoos the kind of shapes people like to look at. So you obviously need to create some kind of new language, to talk about your tattoos with your client, your peers. I have heard you use words like "structure", "connectors", "tractors", "spikes"... this is very specific to biomech tattoos. How do you come up with this vocabulary? Are your peers involved? Are there secret meetings during which the norms of biomech are created for biomech artists only?
Markus: (laughs)... yes there are! Actually this whole terminology used in biomech tattooing is already defined in Guy Aitchinson's book, Reinventing the Tattoo, with words like "coils", "spikes", "spines" and "hooks". But I didn't want to use the same terminology over and over. So the secret meeting took place between Adrien Dominic and myself, when we were putting together a seminar on biomechanic design. Some of these terms came about then, because we needed a vocabulary to get our point across, we needed a narrative and we realized that we saw biomechanic, abstract or organic tattoos as a language and came to certain conclusions. To that effect, we needed a vocabulary, a grammar. Terms like hooks, spirals, blades, claws, words to describe different kinds of textures became the vocabulary we needed. You can actually write flowing poetry, oracles or music with them, but you can also choose to jumble them up all together, and make it hard to read. And people won't want to read it because it is not self-explanatory.
We thus gave people a little bit of a grammar to build sentences that anybody can read without necessarily understanding biomech.
So that was a secret meeting indeed!

• Stef: Textures are clearly a key research area for you. Something that I find very interesting when following you is that you live very close to nature and take lots of pictures: trees, bark, mushromms, leaves, grass...and the way you use it in your tattooing is really fascinating. So what makes a texture interesting for you?
Markus: That's a really good question!
I am looking for different things.
The main reason I post these pictures is to get people to get outside themselves and take good photos. Because if you are able to see what makes a good photograph, chances are you will be able to make better tattoos. Because you shool your eye for that kind of things.
If you go out into nature you are basically surrounded by chaos. Nothing is necessarily beautiful out there but as a photographer you need to isolate a viewing angle and a frame.
Nature itself offers you this composition: the bark, the mushrooms, the moss.
And I see it, not because I was looking for it but because it is beautiful.
I am looking for certain color schemes, certain color combinations, ratios.
I don't want a field of mushrooms all of the same size.... although that could also be interesting.There are so many ways to define something beautiful.
And I think, me taking lots and lots of photographs, is also a little bit of my own journey to try and find out what that actually means and to analyze what made me take a photo of this and what made this beautiful to me. And then among the hundreds I have taken, I have to choose one that I can post later. And that process to me is actually more important almost for my learning than finding it in nature.
But the whole thing is about having a really good reason to go out and to get fresh air and maybe take the bike out and do a little bit of workout. For me it's an incentive to do all that and I get to say it is also for work because I can take a couple of pictures, so my time is not wasted or whatever. And then I take these pictures and bring them home. I find out which one is the most beautiful and that's when I really start analyzing because I think taking photos for me is way more intuitive. I see something that I like and I try to get the photo to show exactly what my eye or what my brain saw. I try to get across what my heart saw. And I like macro photography because you get to see a lot of things that most people miss. And that's also why I like biomech: because it's a little bit of a parody of nature and physics around us. You can distill the things that you think make nature beautiful to you. And you can put it into a narrative. I'm learning a lot through my photography and I hope I inspire people to go out and do their own photography , that's basically my motive to go out and photograph. And I did photography before I did tattooing. So that's something that I've always thought of.

• Stef: Yes I know of other tattoo artists who also find photography to be very useful for their work. What you are saying is a very good illustration of your defintion of biomech - that I absolutely love - and which is :"something beautiful that you don't understand". Come on, now, that should be the title of a book or documentary!
　
Markus: (laughs) Thank you! Well I think that's probably a little bit of my journey. Since I've been a little kid I've always had my hands in the dirt. I was always out in nature and I was always very visually fascinated by it. I bought my first SLR camera really as soon as I could afford one. And I would photograph all kinds of things. But now photography has become so easy , we now have these mobile phones basically that can take pictures that are almost as good as the pictures that I can take with a DSLR.
And so it just became very easy for me to just go out and take a really good camera with me that takes pictures that are good enough to show to other people. There was a big dip in my taking photos when I was just getting tired and too lazy to lug my DSLR around with me everywhere. That's like a backpack full of stuff - and I make way better pictures with that than those I make with my telephone of course - but I've taken really good pictures with that phone, and they're good enough to make me happy and to inspire me and to show off and share and do all that stuff with. So. I'm pretty happy with technology at the moment! Maybe that's also why it has become more of a thing that I do now than a couple of years ago; because there was just this whole equipment that was just too big and heavy to have with me all the time.

• Stef: Yes indeed! Speaking of technology, I read your article about the end of paper. I guess you use digital painting for its flexibility and the way it enables you to try things, erase and start again.. But tattooing on the other hand requires perfect strokes. How do you approach those two different mediums? Is it a different mindset as well as a different pleasure for you?
Markus: I find drawing extremely frustrating. What I like about tattooing is that I am with somebody else and that it's an intimate social interaction.I'm there with another human being.
Drawing to me, even if it's digitally, has always been really frustrating . I don't like to draw, I don't like to paint, I don't like to do any of those things.
Drawing digitally is just a means to do it quicker, to just get to where I want to be. To get to the thing that I want to express as quickly as possible.
It's just a tool that gives me a little bit more time in my day and more time to spend on the tattoo and also to show my client what I'm about to do. The thing with biomech is that it is very hard to explain. That's purely a visual language and I cannot explain it . I mean I have to expect so much trust of my clients already. But at least you know, if I'm doing this digitally, I can show them and explain to them with visual tools what I'm about to do to them!
I think that makes it a lot easier for them to trust me. And I always have my clients here with me when when I'm drawing, well at least some of the time.
And not only for their benefit. I just work harder when my client is breathing down my neck and I just get more done. To me it's a nicer way to bring these things to life. The whole process of having my client here for a couple of days while I am designing their piece enables me to get to know these people really really well. There are lots of things you can talk about, that you can "nerd" about together, over certain design and certain things that you want to put in there. And the greatest part of that is that, every single piece that I do has its own character and every single piece is a part of me. But every single piece also carries a big part of them being here with me while designing it, and everything that you see in each respective piece is also part of the character of the person that wears them and I think that's special. I don't think a lot of people are really doing that for their clients. For good reasons too. And you know sometimes that backfires for me too, not everybody is prepared to spend that much time with me or to give that much thought to their tattoo. For some people it can be a bit too much to ask because they haven't really been ready for that. Which is also why I try my best to explain beforehand that that is something that is going to happen.
... I totally forgot what the question was and how we got here... (laughs)
• Stef: We started with the benefits of digital drawing! But now that we are talking about your process can you tell us more now about it? What does a week of work look like for you?
Markus: It really depends on what kind of a week I have...You know normally in a month I have two new pieces and then two weeks when I just work on ongoing clients. When I'm having a week that involves a new piece, normaly on Monday I will receive my client for the first time and we will just talk and sketch a little bit
And then I will draw for two days like Tuesday and Wednesday. We draw and they are in the city and they're walking around in Berlin .They're visiting the city or meeting people there or whatever and then we meet in the evening, draw together again a little bit or talk about the piece. On those kinds of weeks, I normally only tattoo actively on two or three days. So that's like Wednesday, Thursday and Friday or only Thursday and Friday.
Most of the time, I only tattoo for two days and spend like three days on the design. So you know, I really have a lot of time to spend on every design that I'm doing and people are prepared for it. I tell them in advance: "you're here for a week. And most of the time we will not be tattooing. We'll spend most of our time together on your design and getting it perfect. And once we have everything we set it in stone and we set it in skin."
Back in the days, years ago, I would go on for like 10 hours a day. I would take people to the brink of what they could bear, but now I can't do that myself anymore. Most of my clients can go on longer than I can. My eyes are getting bad you know. I have glasses now, my neck and my back are bad...
• Stef: Well! Look I got my first pair of glasses just yesterday... so I know what you mean...
Markus: Really! Congratulations! Fresh upgrades you know....
We are turning into cyborgs as we grow older. Yeah I have not had my glasses for very long either. It's been like I don't know maybe three four months now.
And that's great. You know having glasses is great after needing glasses for a long time because well you can see again! (laughs) And they help me to keep my back a little bit more perpendicular to the ground so I'm not hovering over and don't have get too close to my work and all that stuff that can really hurt you.
But I think I work around six to eight hours a day when I'm tattooing and I'd like to have like a minimum of four to five hours, that would be nice. But you know I'm really relaxed with that kind of stuff because I work from a home studio, so I don't have an extra rent to pay and I don't have extra people to pay and all that stuff so I don't have to make like ridiculous amounts of money every month. So I don't have to to work crazy hours. I think I work actively tattooing in the chair - on average - 15 hours a week or something. I think that's a healthy amount that I can do for a long time.
• Stef: and to wrap it up on this subject.... how long is your waiting list?
Markus: Not so long. You know it's not crazy long. It's long enough for me to be able to pick and choose a little bit. But most people that ask me already went through all the hassle. They found and read my website, and wrote me an email, and did all of these things, they had the patience to jump through all the hoops that I put up for them so they are already people that are quite serious.
And most of those people will be tattooed by me eventually.
And I normally don't have to book myself out for longer than a year. If you sent me an email today I would get back to you within two or three weeks. And we would be tattooing within half a year normally.

So the waiting time is like six months, something like that.



• Stef: You seem to put a lot on value on learning solo and you said once :"Don't follow the guide, try to find the path you are looking for" . So, have you ever had an apprentice, do you have one right now? Is it a kind of relationship you look for or do you prefer to work solo?
Markus: I do prefer to work solo.
You know what, I had an apprentice way too early. I was forced to take an apprentice a little bit in a way, not really "forced" but that was pretty much the only way that things would be done back then. And I wasn't ready for it. I don't have the patience necessarily to be with one person all the time. You know I love to have people around me. But I like to have changing people around me
And I think if I had an apprentice that would require a lot of patience from me. And I also don't really believe in this system because I didn't learn like that myself. So. How am I supposed to teach something that I haven't done?
As you already said, I believe in learning by yourself through observation and using your brain. And I am willing to put a seminar together and give people hints to follow a certain path. Some of my seminars are very technical. But most of them are more philosophical, most of them are about how to use your brain not what to use it for. And also about how to use your eyes and what to look for and which stones to turn; which stones to turn in order to find something nice. But I won't show you exactly which stone to turn around or where all the treasures lay.
This is not a walk through.
I don't believe in that. The same as I don't think that if you're driving your car with a navigation system, you learned a lot about your city. If I take that away from you, you will get lost. And that may be the first time you will be able to actually learn something about your city, when you're getting lost in it. In terms of tattooing and taking an apprentice, I'll reserve that energy when/ if my daughter wants to learn tattooing. Then I will teach her tattooing and that will require a lot of patience from both of us! And I don't think I will spend any energy on anybody else. I think that belongs to my daughter if she wants it.
She is 11 by the way.
• Stef: Oh! She's older than I thought. So the gate we saw in one of your videos is not a kid gate but a...
Markus:... a dog gate! yes it is!
• Stef: OK, so did becoming a father (or a dog owner!) change your tattooing in any way?
Markus: Well they got me out of my own head.
I was always somebody who got immersed in things 100 percent. And when that happens I'm not there for anybody else anymore. I'm very good at being alone and being with myself and not talking for days and following one certain goal, like running behind or chasing a dragon. I'm really good at that. So back in the day it was computer gaming or it was drawing.
Now it is mountain biking and tattooing and you know coming up with seminars. But yeah having a kid is taking on a real responsibility because I think there's no responsibility like having a kid. And a dog is a little bit like that if you're taking it seriously. You're not only responsible for yourself anymore, you are more than one person now and being a father, sometimes you have to step away from your work. Ideally that is.
I do have my wife and she takes up a lot of my slack and she allows me to still be very very much hunkered down in my chasing my little dragons. So I can do that. And you know she takes a huge load off my shoulders.
When you said you had six kids before we began this interview, to me it was like "oh my God that's a f(biiip) nightmare". That was my first thought. That was my first thought because I couldn't imagine it. I wish I was the person who would want six kids. (stef refrains himself from screaming that he never wanted kids in the first place! He was tricked into it!) You know I think there's the emotions and the love and the good times. I do envy that sometimes. But I think my kid is a little bit like me. She likes to be alone, she likes to spend time by herself. She reads a lot of books, she has her own little creative projects, she draws and she is sculpting and she's trying out all kinds of different things. She's doing it so well that I feel like I would be in the way with all my preconceived notions and all my ideas, and everything that I have learned. I would taint her experience. And she's learning exactly how I am learning and whenever she is interested enough to actually come to me and ask me, we then spend a lot of time together. But I also let her do her own thing a lot and I'm very proud of her. We nerd out together, we watch movies together, we watch series together. We go into deep nerdy conversations about The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit and that kind of stuff. We love that kind of thing. So we have fun mostly. You know,I don't really have to be a traditional father, my wife does a lot of that kind of parenting. I can be just a buddy and a friend, and somebody to nerd out with. But somebody too who makes sure her creativity is not being destroyed by school or other people

• Stef: Thank you for sharing all this. Has she expressed any interest in tattooing yet?
Markus: Yes, every now and then she comes down to the studio and hangs out for a little bit and asks a few smart questions. But you know she's reserved about it. It's not like something that she is wildly interested in. But she's 11. She is turning into a teenager right now. So we'll see. We'll see what's happening. It's either, she will not show up in the studio at all anymore, or it'll be more. It's one of those two. So we'll see. I think I have a chance of still being "the cool dad", but who knows?

• Stef: Well I am sure she will one day come to realize how extremely cool it is to have a tattoo artist for a dad! I know you live close to a forest, to stay - I quote "away from pop culture". You refuse to be caught in the prevalent business of our connected world. I understand it is also to create certain working conditions, such as loneliness and silence. Do you meditate?
Markus: I tried getting into meditation a little bit more because I thought it would be an advantageous skill to have. I am pretty good at relaxing but I am very bad at turning my head off if that makes any sense. Physically I can relax that's not a problem, I can get tattooed for a long time, I can hold pretty still and I can turn my body off and on,that's really not a big problem for me. I'm not a tensed guy.
But in my head I'm very tense and it's very hard to switch my head off, and I think meditating can be very beneficial especially for people who are very emotional like me. It's quite beneficial to be able to turn your head off and therefore that might be the next step. If I'm good at turning my body off and on, then I should be able to turn my mind off and on. So that's something that I pursue but not like super actively. Every now and then I do a little guided meditation.
And with meditation, you learn a lot about yourself. And I think getting tattooed is a bit of the same experience: if you get good at getting tattooed, you're good at meditation. It's like some kind of endurance workout: being on a bike or running is also a form of meditation where you can let the mind wander. I do get better at that. Tattooing itself can be meditative. I love to just put headphones on, and let my clients watch television or do whatever they want to do. I like encapsulating myself a little bit thanks to headphones and listening to my own music or listening to a podcast or an audio book.
The only way, since I was a little kid, for me to turn my head off was to listen to a story while I was doing something with my hands. I always need to do two things at the same time. And then my head shuts up. And that's my favourite place.
That's my favourite place when I'm listening to a book while tattooing or when I'm listening to a book or a podcast and I'm driving or when I'm on my bike. That to me is my favourite place. That's the only way that time is standing still and my head is turned off and there's just information coming in there's nothing coming out. So that's a pretty good feeling. And I wish I could kind of achieve that without having to put information into my brain to be relaxed. I still think that I should be able to achieve that, to just get to that point by myself. But I find it very hard.
But I'm still trying. And it depends on how much stress I am under, how many different projects I am running in the background you know because normally I have three or four ideas that I'm working on and I almost never take notes. So. You know, it's all in my head most of the time until it's ready.

• Stef: The level of concentration and focus that you achieve when you get to that place in your head that you mentioned is very impressive and is something we should all aspire to. And it is typically one of the reasons I don't like conventions anymore. The noise, the commotion... and a profound dislike for tattoo politics ! Do you go to any conventions?
Markus: I go to conventions but almost never for work.
Since I'm working here in the forest, and I'm always working in a vacuum and I'm always having to come up with everything myself a little bit, well I'm only connected to all of my peers through the Internet and through apps and my phone or skype.
So I love being at conventions where I know that I will find people that I know and I love to give seminars at conventions. That is really a huge deal of fun for me. That's a great experience and I do like conventions. But I don't like to go there for work. I don't think it's a great environment to get tattooed or to tattoo; but it is a great environment to meet people to just walk around and talk. I mean I'm good at being lonely - as we have clearly established! - but I'm also good at being social. I can do both. I just have to snap into that role and then I can do both things and I really enjoy both respectively.
Everything in small doses, right?
So yes, I do like tattoo conventions. I go only to a couple ones that I like. I'm a little bit spoiled I guess when it comes to tattoo conventions.
• Stef: Which ones do you like?
Markus: I like the big ones. I like the London Tattoo Convention. That's a really buzzing place. I like Milano especially because people there really have a great way to come together. Everything is in the same place.
Those are pretty much the only conventions that I went to in Europe.
In America I like Hell city. It's a great convention. And all the Paradise Gatherings are always amazing. Those are probably my favourite ones. And it is great when they bring down the Paradise Tattoo Gathering or Artist Retreat to Europe like in Venice.
What I heard good things about is Evian. I would really like to check that out. That sounds like something I would love to do. Like last year I wanted to do it and I was invited to do it.
But it overlapped with Paradise Gathering and a trip to America. So that couldn't happen but I hope that I might be able to go there this year.
• Stef: Evian is one of Dimitri HK's favorite conventions too, it is very peaceful.
Markus: Yes, we don't have a lot of these types of gatherings here in Germany yet.

• Stef: Talking about your peers, I often see you associated such as Nick Baxter, Jeff Gogue. Well I guess outstanding people tend to be attracted with each others! What I noticed is that you have so much more in common than just tattooing: teaching, writing and an overall holistic approach to your work.
Can you tell us a bit more about your relationship with Jeff and Nick?
Markus: With Jeff and Nick, my relationship is more professional than anything.
I think with Nick, I don't really have that big of a relationship. We hung out online more than anything else, especially back in the day when his site was new and he had a forum going . I was then posting on forums and I was very active online talking to people, trying to find my place in tattooing a little bit .
Nick and I kind of explored tattooing at the same time and now we talk to each other not only about tattooing but also about all kinds of other stuff: like personal agendas and art and science and ethics. All that stuff.
Jeff is somebody who has a big following . I love his work, I've always loved his work and I am still blown away by it. At some point he started noticing my work and he really liked it. I mean, we think along the same lines. He works more with a subject matter. He draws dragons, flowers, people, things that are recognizable. I don't.
But we use the same rules in our work. We have a very similar handwriting and a very similar understanding when it comes to how to draw something. And we learn a lot from each other, we like to talk to each other and we have a very good common grasp on how we present ourselves to the public. I like his way of self representation. I like the way he does business. All of that to me is very clean, very concise, looks very very well put together. Everything he does follows a certain school of design. Because I think he lives everything that he does. He doesn't do anything 50 percent; everything he does is 100 percent and is 100 percent him. And I kind of see myself like that a little bit.
I don't like to be helped by other people with anything. Because most of the time people don't have the same drive as I do when it is about my stuff. And I can work with Jeff because he has the same insane drive that I have when it comes to finishing a project. We both find it very very hard to find people that we can work with. But we found each other and I think both of us are very happy with the kind of friendship that we have because we can kind of blindly just rely on each other's taste when it comes to how we present each others; when we post something about each other on Instagram for example.
I'm not going to be bummed out by the kind of choice that he makes when he posts a picture of of my work in order to promote something that I did or that we did together. I'm not going to be bummed out by the choice that he made there and vice versa. We have a very similar taste when it comes to these things. That's probably the most important thing there. And because that is so incredibly rare to have somebody whom you can trust. If you have very high standards it's very hard to find people that you can trust blindly to do their job up to your standards. That's very very rare. And with Jeff I definitely have somebody like that.
• Stef: You can feel this positive synergy in the awesome video where we see the both of you tattooing William Jones.
Markus: That's basically what I mean, you know. That's how I want a video to look. That's the kind of quality that I'm looking for when I want to represent my work, and I can't always do that myself. And that's why I don't. And Jeff got a film crew together, reviewed them and worked with them and found the right people for the job and just made that happen. And I profited from that greatly. I wouldn't do that with everybody for my own work. And he's just somebody that I can do that with because I know the stuff is going to look amazing. We are also doing seminars together with them and bringing all that stuff to the world.
It looks great and I know that he will have an eye on it and he can publish that stuff without me having to look at it. So it's a great friendship to have. That doesn't happen all the time. It's very rare. A very rare thing to happen for me.

• Stef: You are absolutely right, that kind of friendship is precious and I envy you! I would like to talk to you about mistakes now . I believe we learn a lot from them, as Jeff Bezos from Amazon said "don't worry we have plenty of mistakes ahead of us". So tell us about a magnificent mistake!
Markus: (laughing) But I don't make mistakes anymore!
Well let me think...
The last thing that happened was a computer breaking down and me losing a lot of work.
And of course you're miserable. You have put hours into your piece and then your computer breaks down and it's lost. It has not happened in a while but the one thing that I learned was that every time I was starting something new again and it would always be better than the first version, always. Every. Single. Time.
So. From there on I was less concerned with losing work or just crumbling up a piece of paper and throwing it away. Not everything that came out of my hand was holy to me anymore. I would think: "I can draw this today and then crumble it up, throw it away and draw a better version of it." And that has brought me a huge amount of confidence, realizing that if I happen to lose a drawing of a rose, I can just draw another rose, an even better one the day after when I need it.
An it'll be a a really good rose too. It might actually be a better rose than the one that I drew because I've already drawn one rose before. So you know I will probably do a better job than the first time. And losing work by accident became a lesson.
So I do that all the time now: I start a sketch. And then another sketch. And then I start over. I don't spend a crazy amount of time trying to save a sketch that I made. I just do three or four or five and just pick the best one and keep working on that. Back in the day I would only do one sketch and then noodle that until it was perfect and it would take me forever. Sometimes would be so attached to that drawing because I had already spent so much time on it, that I would keep pouring more and more time into it, while just throwing it away and starting over would have saved me 10 hours of work. And I would have ended up with a better drawing as well. So now I just do that. Now I just get rid of things. Sometimes I've been busy with a design on Photoshop for I don't know like 10 hours. And then I go upstairs and I have a coffee and I go out with the dogs maybe. I just do something else. Then I come back downstairs, and I go back to work and I hate it! And I get really angry. I just draw over half of the thing, and I get rid of like 50 or 60 percent of the whole drawing, getting rid of five solid hours of work. And then I'm happy . And that's probably one of the biggest upgrades that I could have gotten from mistakes like that.
I'm sure there's more but that's the one that comes to mind right now.
• Stef: That's what the writers talk about when they say you have to "kill the darlings" I guess.
Markus: Yes absolutely. But all these sayings are useless to me. I know that these days there are like these little bits of wisdoms everywhere. I have never been the kind of person that just believes it and goes on and starts doing it. Like: "Okay I'm gonna throw stuff away".
I need to come to this realization myself. I need to have these disasters happen to me in order to have these epiphanies. And that's why I believe in making your own mistakes, because that's when you really are writing that information into your long term memory. That's when you really learn something. Everything else that somebody is telling you is just dogma. You still have to test that knowledge. If I'm giving a seminar I'm expecting those people to try to prove me wrong.
And hopefully if they do, they will come back to see me, so I can learn something from them. That would be a great moment. Or they could prove me right. I could live with that too. But I can remember many times when some of my peers told me: "No, you have to do it this way."
And then later on I found out that they were indeed right. I would think: "this IS a lot darker" or "it DOES heal better". And I would find out that I had been doing it wrong. And if I had listened to them right away, I would have done a better job for a longer time. But now I know. And that is a good feeling.
• Stef: Ok. You started tattooing at a very young age. Who has been your best supporter all along?
Markus: That would be without a doubt Guy Aitchinson. I mean he has been nothing but a true friend and a real inspiration. And not only about the way that I want to work, but more about the kind of person that I want to be. I think he has been the biggest inspiration in my career. He is probably one of the most intelligent people that I know. Also the most well known tattoo artists that I know. And still one of the most humble and nice human beings that I've ever met in my life. He is never too shy or too busy to give advice and he will give it with an incredibly intricate answer which is exactly what I love very very much. Always elaborating every idea that he comes up with. He is on so many levels quite an incredible guy.
He has been there almost from the beginning of my tattoo career. He has been there in person, in words, in writing and has guided me through this whole thing
And yet I always questioned every thing he said to me every single time!
And I think that was good and healthy and I don't necessarily work the way that he works. I don't tattoo the way he tattoos, or draw the way he draws. And I think that's also why we can still call each other friends and I hopefully can give something back to him. Every time we meet and speak, there're still stuff that we can talk about, and be interested in. And after 25 years of tattooing and doing this, he's ruling one genre and he keeps reinventing himself. He still has fire, he still has this urge to produce good work and to keep looking for answers. He's not getting tired of it.
He's probably one of the people in biomech who gets copied the most. And yet, after 25 years there is still nobody to replace him. There's nobody who is doing Guy stuff better than Guy does. Nobody is taking his place away from him anytime soon and he cannot think even for a second:: "Ah well I might as well stop tattooing now because this guy is doing it better than I ever will."
So you know that really helps me to relax when I see other people - I don't want to say stealing - it's more about borrowing ideas. Like, if you learn how to play the guitar, you're going to play Metallica songs.
You know that's what you do. You are going to play somebody else's songs, you're not gonna learn guitar riding your own songs right away. That's crazy. Well unless you are a complete genius. But who can expect to be? So. If you're learning how to do biomech, you're going to copy his work. You're going to copy Aaron Cain, you're going to copy Giger. You are going to copy these people's work in order to be able to understand what you're doing, in order to be able to play this instrument.
And. That's okay.
You're not going to replace that guy. There's no guitarist out there who learned how to play Metallica songs and now is playing Metallica songs and is more successful than Metallica at playing Metallica songs. That never happens! So everybody f(biiiip) calm down about that sh(biiiip)...!
I mean that's not that important.
• Stef: (laughing) I made you swear, I can die a proud and happy man...
Markus: (laughing too) Glad I could help you with that !
• Stef: Before we wrap this up, you NEED to tell us about your custom playmobil set .
Markus: How do you know about that ????
Well, my wife got that from my birthday and that's basically my life in a little Playmobil bubble. (shows the playmobil set to the camera) There's my wife and my daughter. And the dogs, one of the dogs fell down you see? That's sooo him! He always falls down, he's the lazy one. So you know there is everything that matters in that bubble: there's mountain biking, tattooing, photography. There is whisky. There is music and podcasts, audiobooks and my seminar: "Don't fight the brain". This person in Berlin is making these. The website is called: IWantEverything.de. This woman basically finds out all kinds of things about you through Facebook or social media. And then she makes one of these little bubbles. So yeah that's funny. Such a great idea.
You know it's one of the most thoughtful gifts I've ever received. And now I'm so terrified of buying my wife anything because this one is gonna be hard to top. So, that's it! she's never going to get a gift from me ever again. "Well you are just to good of a gift giver so you're not getting any gifts anymore."
• Stef: It is an awsome gift indeed!
Well I am done here.
Any parting words of wisdom?
Markus: ach. I am bad with those things...ok here goes...:
I hope that I have an effect on people.
Everything I do in a way is about getting people out of their seats, getting people outside, getting people outdoors to enjoy nature. I believe that when you go outside and actually look at stuff and take photos of your own reference material, or just hold things in your hand, you can use all your senses to explore the things that you want to draw or to understand. Our eyes are not enough. I think going outside and smelling and touching and being able to turn it on your fingers, to hold it up against the light, using all your senses to make an impression on yourself is very very important and it's something that is easily lost in this age of technology. And I'm hoping that by using all of my technology, I am hopefully inspiring people do get away from technology a little bit more.
Does that work?
• Stef: It sure does!

Thank you so much for answering all our questions (and then some). I have had a great time and I am sure our readers will too!